% Titre à améliorer: pas de forme interrogative
The heterogeneous impact of exchange rate movements on inflation

%Abstract: 80 mots 5
Understanding how exchange rate movements will impact inflation is critically important for monetary policy. 
Using several datasets covering most advanced and emerging economies, this column analyses which countries and sectors are under pressure to adjust their prices when subject to an exchange rate variation.
It finds that the elasticity of consumer prices to the exchange rate is heterogeneous across countries, reflecting differences in foreign product content of consumption and intermediate products.

%à faire: introduire le débat en citant d'autres articles VoxEU
In a recent paper (Camatte et al., 2021), we analyse the impact of exchange rate variations on domestic consumer prices using several datasets covering most advanced and emerging economies, from 1995 to 2019.
We perform an accounting exercise based on information contained in world input-output tables. 
Our accounting approach helps identify which countries and sectors are under pressure to adjust their prices when subject to an exchange rate variation

% Premier apport de notre étude: évolution dans le temps
The elasticity of consumer prices to the exchange rate has remained stable over the past two decades  %titre en gras de la partie

In line with the existing literature, we find that in response to a 1% appreciation of the domestic currency, domestic consumer prices decrease
by arround 0.10% on average at the world level.  
The impact of exchange rate variations on consumer prices has remained broadly stable over the past two decades.
We find that the mean output-weighted elasticity of consumer prices increased from 0.06 in 2000 to 0.08 in 2008. 
After peaking in 2008, the elasticity sharply declined in 2009. 
It has hovered around 0.08 in subsequent years. 
Our results concur with the literature.
Using comprehensive measures of global value chain integration, Timmer et al. (2016) find that the expansion of global value chain has slowed down since the Great Recession.


%Deuxieme apport: hétérogénéité entre pays
The impact of exchange rate variations on consumer prices is heterogeneous across countries %titre en gras de la partie

The impact of a 1% exchange rate fluctuation on domestic prices ranges from 0.05% to 0.22%, reflecting different degrees of openness to trade and differences in foreign product content in domestic consumption.
The elasticity is lower for large advanced and developing countries. 
For instance, we find an elasticity of 0.06 for the US.
Within the euro area, the elasticity of domestic consumer prices differs substantially, ranging from 0.07 in Italy to 0.18 in Ireland, a small open economy with a large traded sector and a large share of trade outside the euro area.
For larger countries (France, Germany, Italy and Spain) and countries whose trade is concentrated with euro area partners (such as Portugal and Greece), the elasticity is close to 0.10, reflecting a lower degree of openness to trade.
The elasticity is twice higher for small open economies like Luxembourg, Malta, Slovakia and Ireland.
The value of the elasticity is closely, but not perfectly, related to the share of imported goods and services (from outside the euro area for euro area countries) in household consumption.
The higher the country’s import share in consumption, the higher the elasticity of domestic consumer prices to the exchange rate.
We document the evolution over time of the impact of exchange rate variations on consumer prices.
In line with the existing literature, we find that in response to a 1% appreciation of the domestic currency, domestic consumer prices decrease by around 0.10% on average at the world level.
The impact of exchange rate variations on consumer prices has remained broadly stable over the past two decades. 

%Troisieme apport: le rôle du dollar
Which countries are most impacted by an appreciation of the US dollar? %titre en gras de la partie

We estimate the impact of an appreciation of the US dollar on its trading partners. 
We rely on the simplifying assumption that exports are always invoiced in the exporter’s currency. 
Hence, although recent evidence shows that most international prices are set in one dominant currency (Boz et al. 2020), we do not take into account the large role of the U.S. dollar in international trade invoicing. 
The US example illustrates that countries are affected in proportion to their trading links with the country whose currency appreciates. 
We obtain the highest elasticities for the major trading partners of the US.
The elasticity of consumer prices to the USD amounts to 0.12 for Canada and 0.09 for Mexico.
The elasticity is below 0.06 for most euro area countries.
Ireland stands out, with an elasticity of 0.09, i.e. close to that of Canada and Mexico.
Indeed, the U.S. is Ireland’s major trading partner outside of the EU, even if a large portion of Irish imports from the US (pharmaceuticals and aircraft) are later exported by Irish-based firms without being purchased by Irish consumers, and therefore have a negligible contribution to domestic consumer goods inflation.

%Quatrième apport: impact par produit
Services and industrial goods experience the highest spillovers from an exchange rate appreciation %titre en gras de la partie
Building on sectoral data, we examine which sectors experience higher spillovers from an appreciation of the national currency. 
We focus on the main components of consumer prices, i.e. manufacturing goods, services, food and energy. 
Non-energy industrial goods explain the bulk of the impact of an exchange rate variation on consumer prices. 
Services also play a significant role, especially in advanced economies such as the US, Japan, Germany and France.
Although services are mainly produced domestically and do not rely much on imported inputs, they account for a substantial share of total consumption.
Thus, even small price changes have a large effect on domestic consumer prices.

%Cinquième apport: rôle limité des chaines de valeur mondiales
Global value chains play a limited role in the transmission of an exchange rate appreciation %titre en gras de la partie

We also analyse the role of global value chains in the transmission of an exchange rate appreciation.
We identify four channels through which an exchange rate appreciation impacts consumer prices when production processes are global:
i) the prices of imported final goods sold directly to domestic consumers; 
ii) the prices of imported inputs entering domestic production;
iii) the price of exported inputs feeding through imported foreign production; 
iv) changes in domestic and foreign production costs in turn pass through to the price of inputs for domestic
and foreign goods, causing further production costs variations through input-output linkages.
We find that the first two channels explain three-quarters of the transmission of an exchange rate appreciation to domestic prices. 
The last two channels, which reflect the impact of participation in global value chains, play a limited role, with marked across-countries heterogeneity.

%Conclusion

In a recent paper, we document the heterogeneity of the impact of exchange rate variations on consumer prices.
We find that in response to a 1% appreciation of the domestic currency, domestic consumer prices decrease
by arround 0.10% on average at the world level.
This modest estimate is likely an upper bound. Indeed, we make the simplifying assumption that exchange rate fluctuations completely pass-through to import prices. 
However, a large body of literature suggests that the pass-through is incomplete, even in the long run, as a
result of slow nominal price adjustments or the pricing-to-market behaviour of firms. 
In addition, we work under the producer pricing assumption. However, in large and attractive
markets, competitive pressures may push producers to adopt local currency pricing strategies,
where exporting firms adapt their mark-ups depending on the destination market to offset exchange
rate movements. Hence, using alternative pricing assumptions would entail lower estimates.

References
Boz, E, C Casas, G Georgiadis, G Gopinath, H Le Mezo, A Mehl, and T Nguyen (2020), “Patterns in invoicing currency in global trade,” VoxEU.org, 9 October.
Camatte, H, G Daudin, V Faubert, A Lalliard and C Rifflart (2021), "Estimating the elasticity of consumer prices to the exchange rate: an accounting approach", ECB Working Paper No 2610 / October 2021.
Timmer, M. P., Los, B., Stehrer, R., and de Vries, G. J. (2016), "An Anatomy of the Global Trade Slowdown based on the WIOD 2016 Release," Technical report.
